Aren't in this lecture we're going to be going over composition.
So what is composition.
Well composition just comes down to basically where you place your objects in your image as well as
what kind of contrast in values your image has and that all create creates your composition.
So I like to break down composition into five basic rules for composition.
Now you don't always have to follow these rules.
In fact I highly encourage that you break them sometimes just so you can experiment.
Now a lot of people will tell you that these rules cannot be broken if you want to create good artwork
but if you talk to any really good artists almost all of them will tell you that you can break these
rules whenever you feel like it but they're really good to understand and use as a guide for creating
your compositions in your art.
So the first one is central composition so central composition is just when it says that there is an
object in the center of your image and that's going to be your focal point.
And just by putting it in the center that makes it your focal point.
So for example let's say that we draw a building right here in the middle of her image.
OK.
So those are building now a lot of the time in central compositions.
You're going to have your vanishing point in one point perspective right in the center along with your
object so if we put a vanishing point right there will have vanishing lines coming off like so are perspective
lines.
And then what we can do is we could go ahead and align these perspective lines with trees.
So let's say we have a tree right here.
And then as it comes down to the next area of the vanishing line we're going to go ahead and have another
tree.
But this tree will be a little bit taller because of perspective.
And we'll just continue to do that all the way down.
We'll do the same thing on the other side.
I'll have one more for you right here.
But even though once we race away these are vanishing lines they're still going to be there.
Subconsciously you're going to know that there are vanishing lines going off to this vanishing point
and all that points to the center.
Plus her object is in the center.
Plus we can also Durkan our object so that it's more of the focal point because it'll stand out more
because there's more contrast between our object and our background now.
But that is central composition.
The next one is called the rule of 30.
So the rule of thirds says that if you break up your image into thirds you can use this as a guide to
create a good composition.
So what I'm going to do is I'm just going to draw two lines like so and make sure that the distance
between each line and the edges of my page are about a third apart.
And so now I know that anything that I put on these lines are probably going to be a good bet for where
I'm going to position an object in my drawing.
Then you can also go ahead and operate the horizontal lines of your page up into thirds.
Also like so now generally this top line or the bottom line are the best place to put your horizon line.
So most of the time people put their horizon line down you're at the bottom so let's say that we make
this bottom area our horizon line and then let's say is that we want to add it in an object.
So let's say we want to add in a person.
Well we probably want to put a person right here on this line because this is the rule of thirds is
saying that you want to put things on these lines and that will help your image look really good.
So there's one person right there on that third line.
We have a horizon line on this third line and then we can even fill up a whole third of an area with
an object too.
So let's say this whole area is here we want to fill that most of that in was something.
So I'm going to add it in a house that basically takes up the entire third of my image so I can go ahead
and add and a window right there and even a door.
So now that takes about 30.
Now the next rule is called focal point contrast.
Now what this is it's just contrast within your focal point.
So like we've gone over before it's basically just drawing the viewers idea into whatever you want by
creating as much contrast as possible and contrast can be created in many different ways through line
quality through values.
So we can put contrasting values next to each other.
You can also do it with color if you're using color and your drawings and you can also use it by doing
texture in your drawings by having contrasting textures.
So let's try an example.
So let's say that we have an object right here in our drawing.
What say that it's an apple.
K
so those are Apple.
Now we're going to make this apple a white glowing Apple.
So by adding in a glow around the edge of our apple and making our dark brown black it's going to create
that focal point contrast.
So let's go ahead and fill her background with a turkey color.
And as we get closer up to the edge of her apple we're going to feed that in to the White value around
it.
So it looks like the apple is actually going
great.
Now another thing like I said we can do is we can add some contrast in texture.
So for example let's say that our background is a really rough texture and then we're going to leave
our Apple a very smooth texture so we're not even to add any texture to our Apple but we might add some
really harsh texture to our background.
And as we get up to the edge of her apple we're going to leave that texture out.
And we can go ahead and Durcan these edges just a little bit more.
Also
and so now we've really created some focal point contrast by creating two different textures.
One is the apple which is very smooth and has no teacher at all.
And then a really rough background texture that we also created focal point contrast by adding in a
darker background and then leaving that really bright around the apple and leaving the Apple completely
white.
So we have that contrast in values that creates a focal point.
So as soon as we look at this drawing your eye goes directly to the apple.
All right the next composition type is depth of field.
So we've already kind of gone over this with detail when we went over how to create space in your drawings
but depth of field is basically just blurring one layer of your image and keeping another layer in focus.
So for example let me draw a little diagram really quick so let's say that we have a person right here
and then further up we have some trees in our composition like so you can see the tops of those branches.
And then let's say that we have our background
which has some mountains on it.
Well if you're taking a picture of this with a camera what your camera is going to do is it's going
to focus on one of these layers because there are different distances.
So if you wanted to focus on this character right here then this character would be really sharp and
have hard edges and lots of detail.
Then the next layer would be a little bit out of focus meaning it would be a little bit blurry.
And then by the time you got to this Bakare an area because it's the furthest away would be very blurry.
Now you can change the depth of field by focusing on this middle layer.
And so now that would be really sharp and have a lot of detail.
And then this character would be blurry and this background would be blurry.
So when you're creating a depth of field with drawing it can be a little bit difficult but it can still
be done.
But it's something you definitely want to understand when it comes to creating artwork.
So let's say we're going to recreate this image right here.
But rather than having these trees here we're just going to go ahead and at the background in.
So first off I'm insert off by sketching out a really light character so we're just going to show the
shoulders up.
So there's my character.
Next I'm going to go ahead and add in my background so in his background we're going to have some mountains
just like so and maybe there's going to be a few trees down here at the bottom.
Like so then we might add a little bit more detail onto this mountain.
Perfect.
So our background is going to be in focus and our character is going to be out of focus.
So that means we want the edges of our character to be very blurry so we're going to start off kind
of lighter and then we'll work our way to darker colors.
But we want to make sure that the edge of this character is blurred so it's out of focus.
And so now just by creating that gradual gradient from my dark value to the lighter value of my background
I created the illusion that my character is blurry and out of focus.
But now I've created that depth of field so it looks like you're looking past the character and to the
background.
And that really creates a focal point by making whatever you want your viewer to look at in focus and
making other things out of focus.
Now let's go over the last one.
Symmetry and balance.
So asymmetry basically means that your object is the opposite of symmetrical meaning that the things
on both sides of your lines.
If we divide our drawing up into the middle things on both sides of that line do not match up.
They don't reflect each other.
So let's so let me show you what I mean.
So we have a bottle right here.
If this was symmetrical we would add another bottle in the same exact spot on the other side.
But we want this to be asymmetrical because it makes our composition much more interesting.
So over here we might add a book
like so go ahead and add some pages to that book.
Durkan in the cover.
So this is a symmetry.
So this makes your drawings much more interesting if they're completely symmetrical.
They're going to look really boring.
But you also want to keep in mind that you want to create something called balance and balance just
means that your image is filled on both sides.
Now like I said sometimes you can break composition rules and so sometimes you don't want your image
to be balanced meaning that one side might have an object and the other side has nothing on it that
would create an imbalance in your drawing.
Right now our drawing is pretty balanced because we have an object that is relatively the same size
on both sides of our drawing.
If we were to add a pumpkin on this side behinder bottle like so and then we were at a bowl over here.
I'm going to go ahead and outline my composition so we can see where we are a little bit more.
Well now it's out of balance.
This doesn't look right because this site has much more stuff but if I were to go ahead and add in a
few more things on this side I don't really know what just a ball and whatever else I want to do maybe
another bottle back here.
Well that kind of balances it out a little bit more.
The middle of her composition is looking a little bit better so I'm going to add an object right there
too.
But now our image is looking much more balanced.
Now let's look at an example of something being in balance so if we were to draw an image like so
and not say we had a horizon line like this and then let's say we had a character that we're here standing
on our horizon line and that was the entire image just the foreground the sky and our character.
Well this is empowerments because there is only one object on this side and there's nothing on this
side.
Now something we could do to make this more balanced is we could go ahead and add a hill on this side
of our horizon line like so.
And that kind of balances out our entire image.
So it's almost like you have to imagine that each object and thing that you add to one side of your
image whether it's the sides of your image or the top in the bottom are kind of like a weight.
And so if it's in balance it's going to topple over.
But also keep in mind like I said you can always break these rules.
So just because you have a character on a flat rising line.
So let's go ahead and erase this hill just because you have a character on a flat horizon line and it's
imbalance does not mean there's anything wrong with that.
Sometimes that works and sometimes you want to do that because it makes your viewer feel uncomfortable
and that might be what you're trying to create with your viewer or right that brings us to the end of
this lecture.
So in this lecture we learned five basic composition rules.
So the first one we learn is Central which is where you put your focal point in the center of your image
and then you have lines pointing to that center image.
If we wanted to we could also add in other lines in here that are in perspective that would also point
to our center image.
Next is the rule of thirds.
So the rule of thirds says that if you break your image up into thirds wherever those lines are if you
put your objects on those lines or fill those areas in that you're going to create a nice looking composition
the next one is focal point contrast so focal point contrast says that whatever you create contrasts
between is going to be your focal point whatever has the most contrast meaning and value in texture
and in line that's going to be your focal point.
Then the next one was depth the field depth the field is just where you blur one layer of your image
in order to create a focal point on another area of your image.
And the last one is it's asymmetry and imbalance.
So you want to keep things asymmetrical that way your image still looks interesting.
So like here we have all kinds of different objects.
It's not copied onto this other side of our symmetrical line.
And so it makes it look much more interesting but then you also want to keep in mind that you want your
composition to stay relatively balanced.
But then we also learned that sometimes it's OK to create imbalance especially if you want your viewer
to feel a little uncomfortable and it's not always that they'll feel uncomfortable.
Sometimes you can just break this rule and it's fun.
It just makes for an interesting looking composition.
All right.
Thanks for watching this lecture and I really look forward to seeing you in the next one.